openvas-scanner
===============

This is the scanner module for the Open Vulnerability Assessment System
(OpenVAS).

For more information, please refer to the OpenVAS website available at
http://www.openvas.org/.

Please see the file COPYING for the license information.

Please refer to the instructions provided below if you want to install
openvas-scanner. If you are not familiar or comfortable with the procedure
described below, we recommend that you use a binary package provided by your
distribution. Information regarding available binary packages is available from
the OpenVAS website.

Note that you will need the openvas-libraries modules to compile
openvas-scanner. Further information about these modules is available
from the OpenVAS website as well.

If you have any question or suggestions, please feel free to use the mailing
list and the IRC chat to contact the OpenVAS developers.

Please use the OpenVAS bug tracker located at http://bugs.openvas.org/ to report
bugs.


Compiling openvas-scanner
-------------------------

Before compiling openvas-scanner make sure that you installed openvas-libraries.

Run

$ ./configure

to set up the compilation environment.
During configuration, error messages may show up if openvas-libraries or other
libraries and applications needed to compile openvas-scanner are not present on
your system or do not meet the version requirements.
In this case, resolve the issues reported and run configure again.

If you want to install openvas-scanner into a different hierarchy, you may
want to use the prefix option during configuration:

$ ./configure --prefix=/opt/openvas

More information about the configuration options is available through the help
option:

$ ./configure --help

Once you have configured openvas-scanner successfully, you can start the
compilation by executing the following command:

$ make

To install openvas-scanner, you can use the following command:

$ make install

Please note that you may have to execute this command as root, especially if you
have specified a prefix for which your user does not have full permissions.

Setting up openvas-scanner
--------------------------

NOTE: This is only a very concise guide to setting up an openvas-scanner. Please
refer to the OpenVAS compendium available at http://www.openvas.org/compendium/
for more detailed information. One of the many changes from OpenVAS 2.0 to
OpenVAS 3.0 was the renaming of openvas-server to openvas-scanner.

Setting up an openvas-scanner requires the following steps:

1) The scanner and the client modules of OpenVAS communicate through an SSL
   connection. In order to establish this connection, the scanner needs to have
   an SSL certificate it can present to the client to prove its identity. You
   can interactively create this certificate by using the following command:

   $ openvas-mkcert

   This command will guide you through the certificate creation and place the
   certificates in the correct locations on your system.

   NOTE: If you want to use openvas-manager together with openvas-scanner you
   may want to create the client certificate now. Please see the openvas-manager
   INSTALL file for details.

2) You need to create at least one user on the openvas-scanner to be able to
   login with a client. This can be done through the following command:

   $ openvas-adduser

   The command will guide you through the user creation and allow you to specify
   a name and authentication method for the user and to define rules restricting
   the usage of the scanner by this user. For more details on rules please
   refer to the OpenVAS compendium available through the OpenVAS website.

   Alternatively you can use openvas-administrator to create users with a single
   command. Please refer to the openvas-administrator documentation for details.

3) In order to run vulnerability scan, you will need a collection of Network
   Vulnerability Tests (NVTs) that can be run by openvas-scanner. Initially,
   your NVT collection will contain very few NVTs. It is recommended that you
   synchronize with an NVT feed service before starting openvas-scanner for the
   first time.

   Your installation is preconfigured to synchronize with the OpenVAS NVT Feed.
   Simply execute the following command to receive thousands of NVTs from this
   feed service:

   $ openvas-nvt-sync

   Please note that you will need at least one of the following tools for a
   successful synchronization:
   * rsync
   * wget
   * curl

   NVT feeds are usually updated a few times per week. Be sure to update your
   NVT collection regularly to detect the latest threats.
   Please visit the OpenVAS website for more information on available NVT feeds
   and instructions for integrating feeds into your scanner installation.

4) You can launch openvas-scanner using the following command:

   $ openvassd

   Be aware that the first launch of openvas-scanner after the initial feed
   synchronization or after large feed updates will take longer than usual since
   the internal scanner cache has to be updated. Subsequent launches will be
   much quicker.

   Please note that although you can start openvassd as a user without elevated
   privileges, it is recommended that you start openvassd as root since a number
   of Network Vulnerability Tests (NVTs) require root privileges to perform
   certain operations like packet forgery. If you run openvassd as a user
   without permission to perform these operations, your scan results are very
   likely to be incomplete.

5) Once the scanner has started, you can use a client like OpenVAS-Client, GSA
   or GSD to connect to your scanner using the user name and credentials you
   specified in step 2.  Please refer to the documentation for your client for
   more information.

   Be aware that modern clients like GSA or GSD will need the openvas-manager
   module to connect to openvas-scanner. See the openvas-manager documentation
   for installation instructions.

If you encounter problems, the files /var/log/openvas/openvassd.messages and
/var/log/openvas/openvassd.dump may contain useful information. (The exact
location of these files may differ depending on your distribution and
installation method.) Please have these files ready when contacting the OpenVAS
developers through the OpenVAS mailing list or the online chat or submitting bug
reports at http://bugs.openvas.org/ as they may help to pinpoint the source of
your issue.
